# Hospitalisation

The essential aspects of reptile husbandry have been covered in second year. Facilities for hospitalisation do not need to be large or environmentally enriched. Instead they need to be functional, providing appropriate heat, light, humidity and be easily cleaned out. Plastic or melamine vivaria serve this purpose well and can have open tops for chelonians. A spot lamp to provide a basking area and UV- b light should be provided. Disposable substrate such as newspaper should be used and this allows faecal and urine output to be monitored and collected for analysis. Cardboard boxes can be used as disposable hides. Disinfection between animals is mandatory. Water can be provided or the reptile can be taken out for bathing instead. Overnight the basking lamp should be turned off. The vivarium temperature should be kept at 210C. Heat can be provided by keeping the entire room warm or due to a thermostatically controlled ceramic heat lamp or heat mat used within the vivarium. The basking temperature can be monitored by a thermometer. All heat sources should be guarded to prevent burns.

Larger animals or those requiring more specialised accommodation can be difficult to house appropriately in the clinic. Larger enclosures and more potent heat sources will be required. Rainforest species or semi aquatic species will fair better in an enclosed vivarium with a more even distribution of heat and higher humidity. This can simply be by placing a cat litter tray of damp substrate within the tank. Zoonotic diseases can be transmitted from reptiles. All individuals handling them should wear disposable gloves. Most shed Salmonella sp and/or Campylobacter sp. Aquatic species that are too sick to swim should be dry docked and kept on a damp towel.
