# Snake mites

Snake mites are the most common ectoparasite of snakes and lizards seen in practice. The initial source of infection is usually from a newly acquired animal. These are motile parasites that produce eggs which are laid in the environment. These hatch to produce nymphs which then feed on the host animal prior to developing into adults. The whole life cycle takes 13 – 19 days, which allows numbers to increase dramatically. The mites like to hide in skin folds and a close inspection around the eyes, mouth, gular fold and cloaca are good places to find them. They are photophobic and examination of the environment with torchlight can give an indication of the level of infestation. Reptiles with mites are pruritic and spend a lot of time soaking in water bowls and can do self trauma. Dysecdysis is a common secondary complication in snakes. Anaemia can develop in severe infestations. Treatment involves environmental control and topical treatment of the reptiles. Ivermectin made into a spray formulation works well. Injectable ivermectin can be given depending on the species. An alternative is to use fipronil as a wipe and a spray in the environment. Treatment every few days is recommended until there are no mites. Bathing regularly also helps. All disposable items should be burned and the vivarium simplified. Products such as dichlorvos (Vapona) should not be exposed to reptiles. Any enclosure should be thoroughly washed prior to reintroduction. OP toxicity and pyrethroid toxicity have been reported.
