# Preliminary diagnostics and parasites

Preliminary diagnostics

A faecal screen should be performed on every reptile presented to the clinician. Many parasites we see have a direct life cycle. Reptiles are messy feeders and inhabit the same vivarium every day and levels can build up to critical levels over time. Some can be heavily infested at the time of purchase. Invertebrates fed to insectivorous species generally have free range throughout the tank and can quickly contaminate themselves with reptile faecal material if not ingested quickly. They can therefore be a source of autoinfection. Any uneaten livefood should be removed to prevent damage to the lizard but also destroyed such that they do not contaminate other livefood by being replaced in the tub and fed out again another day. Parasitic infections can be reduced by using a substrate that can be easily and completely removed. All uneaten food should be removed promptly. Regular faecal screening is useful to identify if any treatment is warranted. Ensuring reptiles have a negative faecal sample prior to going onto a particulate substrate is vital to limit pathogen build up over time.

Ivermectins should not be used in chelonians as it can enter the central nervous system and cause paralysis by activation of GABA receptors.

A fresh wet preparation, a floatation and concentration techniques or quantative floatations can also be used.

In some animals obtaining a faecal sample can be difficult. Snakes in particular void infrequently. In these cases a cloacal flush should be performed using a tube. 1% of the animals bodyweight in warmed saline can be infused into the cloaca/colon. In many animals the insertion of the tube can induce voiding prior to infusion. This is preferred as the faeces are more concentrated. However if infusion is required, concentrating techniques can be used. The back end of the reptile is massaged and then the watery contents aspirated.

A few types of parasites are seen commonly. Many can be carried causing no clinical signs and subclinical carriers are the main route of introduction of infections into a collection. Thus diagnostic testing to prevent the introduction of agents into a collection is wise.

Coccidiosis is a common parasite, particularly in bearded dragons. In this species Isopsora is found. These cysts have two sporocysts, each containing four sporozoites. Toltrazuril given daily by mouth for 3 days is a suitable treatment. Sulphonamides have also been used. Oxyurids are commonly found in lizards and chelonians. Large burdens can develop due to their direct life cycle, but small burdens require no treatment. They are small worms up to 1cm in length. Anorexia, obstruction and rectal prolapse have been clinical signs reported. The eggs are D shaped with thin walls. Ascarids are commonly identified in chelonians. The adults can be up to 10cm long and can lead to intestinal impaction, vomiting and death. Common types have direct life cycles. The eggs are thick walled with scalloped edges. Fenbendazole is an effective treatment for worms. Lower doses given over a few days are safer than a single higher dose.

Ciliates are also commonly identified in chelonian faecal smears and many of these can be evident in high numbers in sick chelonia due to secondary overgrowth. Many are commensals such as Balantidium sp or Nytcotherus sp. If the chelonian is sick and high numbers are identified then treatment should be given. Metronidazole is a suitable treatment.

Cryptosporidium is a common pathogen in squamates and two species are recognised. Cryptosporidium serpentis in snakes and C. saurophilum in lizards. In snakes it infests the stomach leading to hyperplasia of the mucous glands and hypertrophy of the stomach itself. This causes a mid body swelling and regurgitation and emaciation. The parasite life cycle is speeded up after feeding. In lizards is causes small intestinal tract disease and leads to a wasting condition. It is particularly common in leopard geckos. The diagnosis is made by a ZN stain of the faeces or a regurgitated meal. Ultimately a biopsy of the intestinal tract or stomach sent for histopathology will lead to a diagnosis. 80% of the cysts reinfect the host without being shed. The remaining 20% are immediately infective upon being passed and are extremely resistant to most disinfectants. Heat (600C for 5 minutes), formalin (10% contact time 18 hours) and ammonia (5% contact time 18 hours) were effective a neutralising the oocysts. Treatment is largely unrewarding. Cryptosporidia do not usually cause a problem in chelonians.

Other protozoa, yeasts and fungi may also be encountered. Many protozoa are non pathogenic. Fungal overgrowth is common after antibiotic therapy and can be fatal. Metronidazole is used for protozoa and nystatin for yeasts. Systemic fungal therapy can be performed with itraconazole.
