# Supportive care

Initial supportive should initially be warming the reptile. There is no point medicating or assessing a cold hypothermic reptile. Fluids should then be provided. Reptiles have a maintenance requirement of 30mls/kilo/day. This can be via a number of routes. Bathing If mildly debilitated Daily Can add electrolytes

Stomach tubing More severe cases 1% of bwt 4 x day Use electrolytes then nutritional support 50% SVL snakes Behind ribs lizards Back of abdominal scute chelonians Parenteral fluids Seriously ill reptiles 1% of bwt 4 x day Use mammalian fluids Blood osmolarity of reptiles can vary

In chelonians epicoelomic fluids can be given just above the plastron in between the head and foreleg. This fluid is delivered into the potential space between the pectoral muscles and the plastron. There is considered to be a good degree of vascularisation in this region as the pericardial fluid in chelonia can act as a fluid store during periods of drought or hibernation.

Intracoelomic fluids are easy to give to reptiles. In lizards the best site to inject is into the caudal quarter of the coelomic cavity off the midline on the ventral aspect with the lizard turned over. Care has to be taken to avoid the lung fields and this is of particular important in the chameleons as they have digital projections from the back of the lung. In snakes injecting into the last quadrant is best. The prefemoral fossa is the best site for chelonians. The tortoise is tipped away from the handler and the injection delivered into the lower section to avoid injection into the lungs and bladder. Draw back prior to injection to check viscera have not been punctured. In debilitated individuals fluid given in this was can pool and fail to be absorbed.

Intracystic fluids can be given to chelonians by passing a tube into the bladder. Care not to stress them or they will urinate it back out. This is useful during anaesthesia.

Intraosseous fluids are ideal for limbed lizards. Many sites can be used but the tibial route is a technique that can be applied across many exotic species. The limb is scrubbed clean using iodine and surgical spirit. Local anaesthetic is injected over the proximal end of the tibia. A spinal needle is inserted down the full length of the medullary cavity. In chelonians IO techniques can be difficult and two sites are described, either the plastrocarapacial bridge or the proximal plastron. Anaesthesia is indicated as a drill is required to gain access. A spinal needle is then placed into the drilled hole. There are a number of issues and complications with this technique, including incorrect needle placement and the author would question the benefit of IO fluids versus other routes in chelonians.

Intravenous fluids are an option as well. The jugular vessels are the only site easily available and the right side is to be preferred as it is a larger vessel in most animals. To do this a cut down technique is required. Anaesthesia is indicated in most squamates. In snakes this should be 12 ventral scutes forward of the heart. The incision is made between the second and third row of scales. The jugular vessel lies just under the end of the ribs. In lizards the jugular lies in a straight line from the angle of the jaw to the point of the shoulder. In chelonians the vessel runs from the tympanic membrane down the neck coursing slightly dorsally. The cephalic, ventral abdominal and ventral tail veins can also be used for catheterisation in lizards.

A chronically anorexic animal is deficient in fluids, electrolytes and energy. Cellular constituents are depleted in order to maintain plasma levels. This can mask the deficiencies. Providing a glucose source to any animal encourages concurrent ion transport into cells. This can lead to depletion of plasma potassium and phosphorous in particular. I recommend that reptiles are maintained on 4% of bodyweight fluids per day until urination in achieved. Once this occurs supportive feeding can begin. The cost of living for a reptile is 2 – 5% of the cost of living for a comparable sized mammal. They do not need much to eat and waiting a few days for rehydration is not a problem.

1% of bodyweight can be given at each sitting by stomach tube. Very weakened animals will require less than this. The animal must be warm to digest and assimilate the food. If capable it will seek warmer temperatures itself. Stomach tubing is only a short term solution and some recalcitrant individuals may be impossible to stomach tube. There are a number of commercially available preparations to use in reptiles and carnivorous species can be given diets intended for mammals. However many of these diets contain high levels of purines which are metabolised to uric acid. This theoretically could lead to renal disease in debilitated uricotelic animals. For longer term supportive nutrition an oesophagostomy tube should be placed.

Bodyweight change is one of the most significant parameters to measure. Initial weight increases can be dramatic as the reptile rehydrates and the digestive tract fills with food. In chelonians the bladder can comprise up to 25% of body weight when full. At this point further elevations will be minor. Ultimately the animal should maintain a well hydrated full bodyweight on its own and the weight should oscillate around the same weight. Progressive weight loss without supportive care is an indication that the reptile needs further nutritional and fluid support. Monitoring urine and faecal output is helpful.
