# Analgesia and anaesthesia

Analgesia of reptiles

Lesions that are painful in mammals are also likely to cause pain in lower vertebrates. Clinical signs of pain tend to be limited but can include withdrawl of painful limbs, withdrawl into the carapace, restlessness, aggression, increased respiratory rate and stinting of the region (snakes may not curl the area for example). Quantifying the effectiveness of analgesics can be difficult as a result.

Local anaesthetics and non steroidal anti inflammatory drugs should be used as a routine. Opioid analgesics are also used frequently in reptiles. Some reports fail to demonstrate a beneficial effect. Morphine and butorphanol are commonly used.

Anaesthesia of reptiles

Respiratory anatomy and physiology have influences on the methods of anaesthesia. Tortoises have a simple glottis at the base of their fleshy tongue. Their trachea is made of solid tracheal rings and the trachea bifurcates very proximally. In some species this can be at the base of the skull and others at the thoracic inlet. This means that endotracheal tubes should be uncuffed and short such that one bronchus is not inadvertently intubated. The bronchi course dorsally into the lungs. This limits the ability of a tortoise to clear respiratory secretions. Squamates have a simple glottis at the base of their fleshy tongue (most lizards) or just behind the forked tongue (in snakes and monitors). The trachea of squamates has incomplete rings like a mammal. Endotracheal tubes should be uncuffed and the length needs to be appropriate based on the species. Most of the snakes we will see have only the right lung functional. In lizards the trachea divides into bronchi which course into the lungs. The longitudinal anatomy of snakes limits their ability to clear respiratory secretions. Lizard lungs can range from simple to multi- chambered. Snakes start off with a parenchymous part which progressively simplifies down to form the air sac. This air sac can extend for over 75% of the snout vent length of the snake.

The heart is three chambered and consists of two atria and one ventricle. The ventricle is functionally split into three chambers. Their cardiovascular system allows for a differential flow of blood depending on the animals physiological state. When breathing the pressure on the pulmonary side of the circuit is lower than the systemic side which allows a small left to right shunt of blood. During breathing there is reduced parasympathetic tone. When breath holding (when diving for example) the parasympathetic tone is increased and this leads to vasoconstriction of the pulmonary artery and a reduction in heart rate. This leads to increased pulmonary resistance and a right to left shunt now occurs. This leads to a pulmonary bypass during diving. This, in combination with other physiological processes, such as a high resistance to hypoxia, allows aquatic species to dive for long periods. Aquatic turtles have survived in a nitrogen atmosphere for 27 hours. This means that tortoises that fall in ponds can survive. It also means that mask induction is pointless as they can just shut the lungs out of circulation. Despite these changes gaseous induction can be used for squamates. This can be performed by directly intubating the animal conscious (snakes), using a face mask (lizards) or using an induction chamber (small squamates). I prefer to use transparent zip lock bags which can be filled with 5% isoflurane in oxygen. The reptile can be manipulated within the bag and once the righting reflex is totally lost the bag can be opened an intubation performed.

Intravenous injectable anaesthetic protocols include either propofol or alfaxalone at 10mg/kg. Ketamine at 2 – 5 mg/kg IV with or without medetomidine are a rarely used alternative. As there is no concern regarding lymph dilution any vein is fine for induction. Although top up doses of intravenous agents can be used I prefer to intubate and use gaseous anaesthesia for maintenance. IV agents provide 10 – 20 minutes surgical time.

IM dosing can be performed with alfaxalone, ketamine or medetomdine and ketamine combinations in chelonians. The outcome of these regimes is variable at best.

Small diameter endotracheal tubes are required and these should be of a suitable length depending on the species considered. Customised tubes can be made from intravenous catheters. It is relatively easy to achieve intubation by waiting for a breath and inserting the tube when the glottis is open.

IPPV is required and best performed by a mechanical ventilator. Respiration rate should be 6 breaths per minute. Initially higher ventilation rates can be used to deepen anaesthesia. Start off with a low pressure/volume and build up until the front legs move to the level expected for a conscious tortoise and in snakes and lizards assess the movement of the rib cage. Low flow rates will be required for animals requiring small endotracheal tubes.

Isoflurane or seveoflurane (has some advantages in reducing recovery times) can be used to maintain anaesthesia. Initially 5% isoflurane or 8% seveoflurane are used to deepen anaesthesia. I prefer to keep the reptile on the maximum level until surgical stimulation. If there is no voluntary movement then the percentage can be reduced to 2 - 3% (iso) or 5% (sevo). Generally the anaesthetic agent is turned off well before surgery is completed.

Anaesthesia is best monitored using a Doppler probe. Practically most conscious reptiles at their To have a heart rate approximately 70 BPM. Anaesthetised reptiles have a rate of 30 – 40 BPM. The probe is best placed at the thoracic inlet or over the carotid vessels. In snakes the apex beat can be visualised and marked prior to placing the probe. In chelonians the probe is best placed at the thoracic inlet or over the carotid vessels. In juvenile tortoises it can be placed over the plastron at the junction of the abdominal and pectoral scutes. Capnography and pulse oximetry can be used to monitor anaesthesia. Reflexes such as the toe pinch, tail pinch, head withdrawl and jaw tone can be used to assess the depth of anaesthesia.

Keep the reptile at its T0 during recovery. Reducing oxygenation leads to an elevation in respiration rate and preventing hypocapnia is also important and helps maintain both rate and depth of ventilation. This can be achieved by closely monitoring the ETCO2 or performed by ventilating with room air. An Ambu bag or a recusitator can be used to achieve this. Reducing both the rate and depth of ventilation can help CO2 levels to build up and O2 levels to drop. Extubate when jaw tone increases and voluntary respiration occurs.

## Related calculator

- [Anestesi, slange](anaesthetic-snake-calculator.html)
