# Blood sampling

Blood sampling is also part of the routine work up of sick reptiles. Reptile veins are hard to find. In chelonians the first site to consider is the jugular vein. This runs on either side of the neck (the right is larger) from the tympanum coursing dorsally. The carotid artery can also be sampled and runs more ventrally. They are both superficial vessels. Care has to be taken as haematomas are common particularly if the carotid vessels are inadvertently punctured. 25 gauge needles will be required in most cases. Other sites include the subcarapacial sinus which is my preferred second option. Lymph dilution is possible at this site but usually has minimal effect on results with careful technique. The lymph vessels lie directly over the sinus site and so some contamination is inevitable. This can be accessed with the head in or out and a longer 1” or 1.5” needle required in larger tortoises. The dorsal tail vein leads to marked lymph dilution and should not be used for blood sampling. It is however useful in aggressive or strong specimens. Tortoises with hinges may also need sedation.

In squamates the first site to consider is the ventral tail vein. This runs in the ventral midline of the tail. Care has to be taken to avoid the hemipenes in males and the musk sacs in females. The ideal site is beyond 12 ventral scales down the tail. Jugular sampling can be performed in lizards and the vessel courses from the point of the shoulder to the angle of the jaw. Cardiac puncture is used commonly in snakes. The apex beat is identified 22 – 33% of length from the snout to the vent. The heart is stabilised and a small gauge needle is inserted into the ventricle. Blood is aspirated with each beat.
