# Nutritional secondary hyperparathyroidism

NSHP or metabolic bone disease is a common finding in juvenile lizards and chelonians. Problems are caused by dietary calcium deficiency, imbalances in the calcium to phosphorus ratio, or hypovitaminosis D. A lack of vitamin D can be due to either dietary deficiency or failure to provide adequate UV-b radiation (naturally or artificially). A critical review of heating, lighting and diet is therefore mandatory in every case that is seen. Clinical signs commonly seen include a soft compressible jaw or shell and a lack of truncal lifting. Thickening of the plastrocarapcial bridge and ventral deviation of the carapace often occur in chelonians. In males hemipenile prolapse is a common finding. Fractures of the limbs are common and there can be marked deviations of the limbs leading to difficultly ambulating. Tetany is possible if the blood ionised calcium drops in lizards or flaccid paralysis in chelonians and is most common in juveniles. Diagnosis is fairly self evident based on clinical history and examination. Radiography can demonstrate gastrointestinal stasis, poor bone mineralization and in cases with renal disease articular gout. A blood profile should be taken to assist with the long term prognosis. Treatment includes placement of an oesophagostomy tube, UV-b light, phosphate binders such as aluminium hydroxide and oral or systemic calcium therapy. Calcium gluconate by injection every six hours is recommended if the ionised calcium is reduced.
