# Clinical examination of reptiles

Whilst taking an account of the husbandry, time should be taken to observe the reptile presented to you. Assess its general demeanour, activity and respiration prior to handling. Lizards should be bright and alert and lift itself off the consulting table. Snakes should impart a feeling of strength when moving and be able to anchor themselves securely. A neurological assessment can be performed but in many cases can be simplified. Allowing free movement will enable an assessment of the animals’ locomotor ability. Head carriage can be assessed and in snakes the ability to rise up to find a level surface is a good indication both of strength and neurological function. Active chelonians should walk or run with their plastron raised off the floor.

Disposable gloves should be worn to handle reptiles. This is to prevent the risk of disease transmission, both between the reptile and you, but also to reduce the risk of you being a vector for disease transmission between different species. Handling should be performed with care. There are a few points worth noting. Snakes are very quick and can be mean. Thus being bitten is a possibility. Venomous species are best to be avoided as specialised equipment such as tubes, hooks, bags and grabbers are required and the risk of envenomation is high for untrained personnel. Large snakes require multiple handlers due to their weight and strength. All lizards can bite and larger lizards can thrash with their tails and scratch with their nails. Large more aggressive individuals should be wrapped in a towel. There is a vaso- vagal reflex and this can be used to subdue an aggressive lizard. Placing pressure over the eyes leads to a parasympathetic reduction in heart rate and response to external stimuli. Placing a bandage over the heads with cotton wool pads over the eyes can enable quick procedures such as radiography to be undertaken.

Handling of chelonians should be performed with care. There are just a few points worth noting. Some species such as Box turtles, Hinge Backed tortoises and Asian Box turtles are capable of closing off sections of their body off from the outside world due to hinges within the shell. This can lead to trapped fingers and intense pain! Larger stronger species can also trap fingers due to forcible limb or head retraction. It is important to ensure fingers are not trapped, grasping and extending an appendage will ensure no hinge is shut. Snapping turtles and soft shelled turtles can (and will) bite with some force and providing them with something to latch onto is helpful in control. They can extend their heads a long way out. Other species can bite and many terrapins get quite cross. It is unusual for most of the terrestrial chelonia to bite unless you are inflicting pain or distress. Cases that are recalcitrant should be sedated for a full clinical examination. A physical examination should be systematically performed in every case seen. Firstly weigh the reptile. This can be directly on the scales or in a plastic tub. In tortoises there have historically been ratios used. These are outdated and should not be used. A tortoise with a tumour, eggs, follicular stasis, and ascites will appear ‘healthy’ according to these ratios.

The temperature of the patient presented to you has an influence on their behaviour and clinical examination and it is impossible to provide a judgement on a cold replies health. If possible hospitalise the animal and examine the reptile after it has reached it’s optimal temperature.

A healthy lizard or chelonian will have bright open eyes with no discharges. Snakes should have clear spectacles with no swelling. There should be no nasal or ocular discharges. Red footed tortoises normally have an ocular discharge.

Respiration should be noticeable but without exertion. If possible examine the glottis when the animal exhales. In reptiles the glottis is normally closed. It only opens when expiration or inspiration occurs. At expiration fluid sounds or a discharge may be noted. Examination of the mouth and teeth should follow. In chelonians there is, usually, a small amount of forelimb movement with no undue exertion or respiratory noise. Increased yawning, face rubbing, effort, noises such as squeaks can all indicate underlying respiratory disease.

Lizards can have two different types of teeth. Acrodont teeth are found in agamids and chameleons. These are not replaced and sit on an exposed boney ridge. Periodontal disease in these families is common. Pleurodont teeth are found in all other species. These are on a ridge inside the jawline and are replaced regularly. Beak overgrowths are a common presentation in chelonians and can be carefully burred back. In lizards the compressability of the jaw should be assessed. In nutritional secondary hyperparathyroidism the bones become soft. In chelonians middle ear abscesses are also common leading to distension of the ear drums.

The skin should be closely examined from the head to the end of the tail. Check closely for any retained skin, spectacles, scars, wounds, external parasites or discharges. The most common external parasite is the snake mite (Ophionyssus natricus) which can infect both snakes and lizards. In tortoises external parasites are limited to ticks in imported specimens. The chelonian shell should be examined for compressibility, loose scutes, discharges, fractures, reddening.

Limbs should be check for the normal range of mobility and any swellings or pain responses. The vent should be examined for any discharges or prolapses. In larger lizards and snakes digital palpation of the cloaca is possible. This enables an assessment of renal size. Palpation of the whole of the coelomic cavity should be carefully performed. Any abnormal masses or fluid should be identified. Listening to the lung fields has limited use. The heart is best assessed using a doppler probe. Transillumination is possible in geckos with pale skin. This highlights the liver and the degree of fat within it can be assessed by colouration alone. In chelonians the coelomic cavity can be palpated via the pre femoral fossa in front of the hind legs. Tipping the tortoise towards the examiner can allow eggs and bladder stones to fall onto your finger and ballottement can confirm their presence. In larger tortoises examination of the cloaca is possible.
