# Reproductive diseases

This is common in female lizards and chelonians, less so in snakes. Hemipenile prolapse in males and oviduct prolapsed in females are covered under cloacal prolapses. Many reptiles need to be exposed to a male to induce ovulation. Naturally female lizards and snakes go off food when gravid. This is due to the fill of the coelomic cavity with developing follicles. This places a huge demand on their reserves and metabolic problems with hypocalcaemia and condition loss can be seen leading to collapse. Infections and abscessation of the follicles is possible and they can rupture leading to an egg coelomitis. Stasis of the follicles is also possible. Egg stasis is also possible due to a lack of appropriate environmental stimuli such as a suitable nesting site, temperature, heat, privacy etc. This can lead to the eggs being retained. It can be difficult differentiating between normal gravidity and disease. Many females may just lack the appropriate physiological and behavioural cues to lay eggs. Females that have eggs to lay are quite fickle about where they lay their eggs. A familiar environment, the correct temperature and humidity and a suitable area to lay eggs are required. Nutrition is important, producing eggs requires high levels of protein and calcium and marginal husbandry can have a greater effect on reproductively active females. Most female squamates will lay eggs without exposure to a male. These conditions are known as pre ovulatory ova stasis (POOS) or post ovulation egg stasis (POES). Diagnosis requires a good clinical history and radiography/ultrasound/endoscopic examination. Blood haematology and biochemistry should also be performed. If shelled eggs are present in the expected location on the radiographs and there is no obvious reason for the stasis (i.e. its behavioural not pathological) then premedication with atenolol and calcium gluconate followed by oxytocin can lead to oviposition. If there are no shelled ova present then surgery is required.
