# Plastronotomy in chelonians

You will need some equipment to do this as it involves cutting through the plastron. Most tortoise vets use diamond discs to cut through the shell attached to DIY equipment such as a dremmel®. Use of a saggital saw (used for orthopaedics) is suitable should you have access!

There are many vital structures underneath the shell (heart, thick bony bridge, and pelvis). This limits access to the coelomic cavity. Hinges should be avoided. A bevel edged incision is made in the abdominal scutes. The incision has bevelled edges to prevent the flap from falling into the tortoise and allowing bone to bone contact to encourage healing. Primary healing is most unlikely and the flap created will die. It is used as a user friendly bandage while new bone is formed from the coelomic membrane. Keeping as many soft tissue attachments as possible will help to maintain flap viability. If removed keep the flap on moistened saline swabs during surgery. Care has to be taken not to go too deep when cutting the shell. Checking the depth by using a scalpel blade can help. The flap can be gently lifted using retractors, screwdrivers or periosteal elevators. It is probably best to find a suitable instrument and keep it so it can be abused for this purpose.

Once the bone is removed the coelomic membrane will be identified. Tortoises have two abdominal veins running caudo-cranially. These should be avoided if possible but if they are cut accidentally then just ligate them. A cranio-caudal incision can be made in the membrane to get access to the coelomic cavity.

Closure of the wound is routine with monofilament material. The flap is replaced. The wound edges can be packed with gel to seal the wound. The flap can be secured in place with either technovit®, Fibreglass, dental repair kits or screws, wire or plates. Many authors are turning to screws and wires as the wound edges can be closely observed for infection. This is of vital importance in traumatic as opposed to surgical wounds where the chances of infection are high.
