# Oesophagostomy tube placement

Tube feeding is only a short term method for supportive care. Oesophagostomy tube placement allows for continued fluid and nutritional support and a route for oral drug therapy. An O-tube can easily be placed using a bolus of an injectable agent given intravenously.

The location for placement depends on the species considered. In chelonians the key to keeping an O-tube in place is to situate the tube far enough back so that the tortoise is unable to hook out the tube with it’s leg. The tube can be placed on the left or the right side. A pair of curved haemostats are introduced into the oesophagus and displaced laterally. Care should be taken to avoid the jugular vein and carotid artery. The skin tents and usually the vessels slip dorsally or ventrally. The skin is cut with a scalpel blade and the haemostats pushed through. The feeding tube is grasped and pulled through the incision and out through the mouth. It is best not to cut it to length at this stage (as it is easier to pull through the incision) but measuring and marking the tube before beginning surgery is wise. Once pulled out the mouth the tube is cut to an appropriate length and directed back down the oesophagus. The tube can be secured using a Chinese finger trap suture or using surgical tape and sutured to the skin with horizontal mattress sutures. In aquatic species securing knots with superglue is advised. Dressing the leg can be useful as it covers the rough scales over the elbow joint further reducing the changes of the tube being pulled out.

In lizards they are placed mid way down the neck and secured over the dorsal spine. O-tubes can be placed in snakes and can be secured by suturing to the scales. The tube can be secured using surgical tape and sutured to the skin with horizontal mattress sutures. They can also be placed in snakes and are probably underutilised.

Body weight should be monitored when an O-tube is in place. Initially weight gain can be marked due to the filling of the bladder (where present) and bowels. After this initial increase faecal and urine output will roughly equal input and the weight will stabilise. The reptile is perfectly capable of eating voluntarily even with the tube in place. Once this has occurred and food intake is approaching the normal volume and frequency, supplemental feeding can be stopped. Weight is held without supportive care the O-tube can be easily removed conscious.
