# Culture samples and antibiotics

Culture samples should be submitted for aerobic, anaerobic (50% of reptile infections include anaerobes) and fungal culture. Most of these cultures will grow gram negative bacteria with multiple resistance patterns. The fact they have grown is irrelevant without supportive evidence of an inflammatory response or suitable clinical signs. Should treatment be required then enrofloxacin can be used. This is bactericidal and effective against aerobic bacteria. It has good activity against Pseudomonas. Aminoglycosides are also used but there is a risk of nephrotoxicity. Ceftazidime is a third generation cephalosporin with excellent anti-pseudomonal activity. It is bactericidal and kills aerobes and anaerobic bacteria. Anaerobic bacterial resistance is low. Another option to consider is antipseudomonal penicillins such as ticarcillin. This is available as an injection in combination with clavulanate. Synergism has been noted between bactericidal antibiotics such as aminoglycoside and the fluoroquinolones that act within bacterial cells and those that damage the cell walls such as penicillins or cephalosporins. Metronidazole can also be used in combination with other agents as it has no aerobic activity.

Common injection sites include the epaxial muscles and the limb musculature. Many animals demonstrate a pain response and chameleons and water dragons can produce a black area in response to pain due to the excitement of melanophores. This should be explained to their owners prior to injection. This colour change is temporary. In chelonians the pectoral muscles can be used and are better tolerated. The site is a little lower than the epicoelomic injection route. The renal portal system can influence drug pharmacokinetics for those items that are eliminated by tubular secretion. The renal portal system can be ignored for most of the drugs we are considering; unless it is excreted by the renal tubules or is nephrotoxic (high levels may pass through the kidneys prior to entering the circulation).
